COUNT LEO NIKOLAYEVICH TOLSTOY was born 
August 28, 1828, at the family estate of Yasna- 
ya Polyana, in the province of Tula. His moth- 
er died when he was three and his father six 
years later. Placed in the care of his aunts, he 
passed many of his early years at Kazan, where, 
in 1844, after a preliminary training by French 
tutors, he entered the university. He cared lit- 
tle for the university and in 1847 withdrew be- 
cause of "ill-health and domestic circum- 
stances." He had, however, done a great deal 
of reading, of French, English, and Russian 
novels, the New Testament, Voltaire, and 
Hegel. The author exercising the greatest in- 
fluence upon him at this time was Rousseau; 
he read his complete works and for sometime 
wore about his neck a medallion of Rousseau. 

Immediately upon leaving the university, 
Tolstoy returned to his estate and, perhaps inr 
spired by his enthusiasm for Rousseau, pre- 
pared to devote himself to agriculture and to 
improving the condition of his serfs. His first 
attempt at social reform proved disappointing, 
and after six months he withdrew to Moscow 
and St. Petersburg, where he gave himself over 
to the irregular life characteristic of his class 
and time. In 1851, determined to "escape my 
debts and, more than anything else, my hab- 
its," he enlisted in the Army as a gentleman- 
volunteer, and went to the Caucasus. While at 
Tiflis, preparing for his examinations as a 
cadet, he wrote the first portion of the trilogy, 
Childhood, Boyhood, and Youth, in which he 
celebrated the happiness of "being with Na- 
ture, seeing her, communing with her." He al- 
so began The Cossacks with the intention of 
showing that culture is the enemy of happi- 
ness. Although continuing his army life, he 
gradually came to realize that "a military ca- 
reer is not for me, and the sooner I get out of 
it and devote myself entirely to literature the 
better." His Sevastopol Sketches (1855) were 
so successful that Czar Nicholas issued special 
orders that he should be removed from a post 
of danger. 

Returning to St. Petersburg, Tolstoy was re- 
ceived with great favor in both the official and 
literary circles of the capital. He soon became 



interested in the popular progressive move- 
ment of the time, and in 1857 he decided to go 
abroad and study the educational and munici- 
pal systems of other countries. That year, and 
again in 1860, he traveled in Europe. At Yas- 
naya Polyana in 1861 he liberated his serfs and 
opened a school, established on the principle 
that "everything which savours of compulsion 
is harmful." He started a magazine to promote 
his notions on education and at the same time 
served as an official arbitrator for grievances 
between the nobles and the recently emanci- 
pated serfs. By the end of 1863 he was so ex- 
hausted that he discontinued his activities and 
retired to the steppes to drink koumis for his 
health. 

Tolstoy had been contemplating marriage 
for some time, and in 1862 he married Sophie 
Behrs, sixteen years his junior, and the daugh- 
ter of a fashionable Moscow doctor. Their 
early married life at Yasnaya Polyana was 
tranquil. Family cares occupied the Countess, 
and in the course of her life she bore thirteen 
children, nine of whom survived infancy. Yet 
she also acted as a copyist for her husband, 
who after their marriage turned again to writ- 
ing. He was soon at work upon "a novel of 
the i8io's and *2o's" which absorbed all his 
time and effort. He went frequently to Mos- 
cow, "studying letters, diaries, and traditions" 
and "accumulated a whole library" of histori- 
cal material on the period. He interviewed 
survivors of the battles of that time and trav- 
eled to Borodino to draw up a map of the 
battleground. Finally, in 1869, after his work 
had undergone several changes in conception 
and he had "spent five years of uninterrupted 
andjgxceptionally strenuous labor Tnnierthe 
IbesfcondUtions of life/' he published War and 
Peace. Its appearance immediately established 
Tolstoy's reputation, and in the judgment of 
Turgenev, the acknowledged dean of Russian 
letters, gave him "first place among all our 
contemporary writers." 

The years immediately following the com- 
pletion of War and Peace were pa**efl in a 
great variety of occupations, none of which 
Tohtoy found satisfying. He tried busying 



VI 



BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE 



himself with the affairs of his estate, under- 
took the learning of Greek to read the ancient 
classics, turned again to education, wrote a 
series of elementary school books, and served 
as school inspector. With much urging from 
his wife and friends, he completed Anna Kare- 
nina, which appeared serially between 1875 
and 1877. Disturbed by what he considered his 
unreflective and prosperous existence, Tolstoy 
became increasingly interested in religion. At 
first he turned to the orthodox faith of the 
people. Unable to find rest there, he began a 
detailed examination of religions, and out of 
his reading, particularly of the Gospels, gradu- 
ally evolved his own personal doctrine. 

Following his conversion, Tolstoy adopted 
a new mode of life. He dressed like a peasant, 
devoted much of his time to manual work, 
learned shoemaking, and followed a vegetari- 
an diet. With the exception of his youngest 
daughter, Alexandra, Tolstoy's family re- 
mained hostile to his teaching. The breach be- 
tween him and his wife grew steadily wider. 
In 1879 he wrote the Kreutzer Sonata in which 
he attacked the normal state of marriage and 
extolled a life of celibacy and chastity. In 1881 
he divided his estate among his heirs and, a 
few years later, despite the opposition of his 
wife, announced that he would forego royal- 
ties on all the works published after his con- 
version. 

Tolstoy made no attempt at first to propa- 
gate his religious teaching, although it attracted 



many followers. After a visit to the Moscow 
slums iri 1881, he became concerned with social 
conditions, and he subsequently aided the suf- 
ferers of the famine by sponsoring two hun- 
dred and fifty relief kitchens. After his meet- 
ing and intimacy with Chertkov, "Tolstoyism" 
began to develop as an organized sect. Tol- 
stoy's writings became almost exclusively pre- 
occupied with religious problems. In addition 
to numerous pamphlets and plays, he wrote 
IV hat is Art? (1896), in which he explained 
his new aesthetic theories, and Hadji-Murad, 
(1904), which became the favorite work of his 
old age. Although his activities were looked 
upon with increasing suspicion by the official 
authorities, Tolstoy escaped official censure 
until 1901, when he was excommunicated by 
the Orthodox Church. His followers were f re- 
quently subjected to persecution, and many 
were either banished or imprisoned. 

Tolstoy's last years were embittered by 
mounting hostility within his own household. 
Although his personal life was ascetic, he felt 
the ambiguity of his position as a preacher of 
poverty living on his great estate. Finally, at 
the age of eighty-two, with the aid of his daugh- 
ter, Alexandra, he fled from home. His health 
broke down a few days later, and he was re- 
moved from the train to the station-master's 
hut at Astopovo, where he died, November 7, 
1910. He was buried at Yasnaya Polyana, in 
the first public funeral to be held in Russia 
without religious rites. 

CHAPTER I 

WELL, PRINCE, so Genoa and Lucca are now 
just family estates of the Buonapartes. But I 
warn you, if you don't tell me that this means 
war, if you still try to defend the infamies and 
horrors perpetrated by that Antichrist I real- 
ly believe he is Antichrist I will have nothing 
more to do with you and you are no longer my 
friend, no longer my 'faithful slave,' as you 
call yourself! But how do you do? I see I have 
frightened you sit down and tell me all the 
news." 

It was in July, 1805, and the speaker was the 
well-known Anna Pdvlovna Sch^rer, maid of 
honor and favorite of the Empress Marya Fe- 
dorovna. With these words she greeted Prince 
Vasili Kurdgin, a man of high rank and impor- 
tance, who was the first to arrive at her recep- 
tion. Anna Pdvlovna had had a cough for some 
days. She was, as she said, suffering from la 
grippe; grippe being then a new word in St. 
Petersburg, used only by the elite. 

All her invitations without exception, writ- 
ten in French, and delivered by a scarlet-liver- 
ied footman that morning, ran as follows: 

"If you have nothing better to do, Count [or 
Prince], and if the prospect of spending an 
evening with a poor invalid is not too terrible, 
I shall be very charmed to see you tonight be- 
tween 7 and 10 Annette Sch^rer." 

"Heavens! what a virulent attack!" replied 
the prince, not in the least disconcerted by this 
reception. He had just entered, wearing an em- 
broidered court uniform, knee breeches, and 
shoes, and had stars on his breast and a serene 
expression on his flat face. He spoke in that 
refined French in which our grandfathers not 
only spoke but thought, and with the gentle, 
patronizing intonation natural to a man of 
importance who had grown old in society and 
at court. He went up to Anna Pavlovna, kissed 
her hand, presenting to her his bald, scented, 
and shining head, and complacently seated 
himself on the sofa. 

"First of all, dear friend, tell me how you 



are. Set your friend's mind at rest," said he 
without altering his tone, beneath the polite- 
ness and affected sympathy of which indiffer- 
ence and even irony could be discerned. 

"Can one be well while suffering morally? 
Can one be calm in tirrfes like these if one has 
any feeling?" said Anna Pdvlovna. "You are 
staying the whole evening, I hope?" 

"And the fete at the English ambassador's? 
Today is Wednesday. I must put in an appear- 
ance there," said the prince. "My daughter is 
coming for me to take me there." 

"I thought today's fete had been canceled. 
I confess all these festivities and fireworks are 
becoming wearisome." 

"If they had known that you wished it, the 
entertainment would have been put off," said 
the prince, who, like a wound-up clock, by 
force of habit said things he did not even wish 
to be believed. 

"Don't tease! Well, and what has been de- 
cided about Novosiltsev's dispatch? You know 
everything." 

"What can one say about it?" replied the 
prince in a cold, listless tone. "What has been 
decided? They have decided that Buonaparte 
has burnt his boats, and I believe that we are 
ready to burn ours." 

Prince Vastti always spoke languidly, like 
an actor repeating a stale part. Anna Pdvlovna 
Scherer on the contrary, despite her forty years, 
overflowed with animation and impulsiveness. 
To be an enthusiast had become her social vo- 
cation and, sometimes even when she did not 
feel like it, she became enthusiastic in order 
not to disappoint the expectations of those 
who knew her. The subdued smile which, 
though it did not suit her faded features, al- 
ways played round her lips expressed, as in a 
spoiled child, a continual consciousness of her 
charming defect, which she neither wished, nor 
could, nor considered it necessary, to correct. 

In the midst of a conversation on political 
matters Anna Pdvlovna burst out: 

"Oh, don't speak to me of Austria. Perhaps 



WAR AND PEACE 



I don't understand things, but Austria never 
has wished, and does not wish, for war. She is 
betraying us! Russia alone must save Europe. 
Our gracious sovereign recognizes his high vo- 
cation and will be true to it. That is the one 
thing I have faith in! Our good and wonder- 
ful sovereign has to perfonn the noblest role 
on earth, and he is so virtuous and noble that 
God will not forsake him. He will fulfill his 
vocation and crush the hydra of revolution, 
which has become more terrible than ever in 
the person of this murderer and villain! We 
alone must avenge the blood of the just one. 
. . . Whom, I ask you, can we rely on? . . . Eng- 
land with her commercial spirit will not and 
cannot understand the Emperor Alexander's 
loftiness of soul. She tias refused to evacuate 
Malta. She wanted to find, and still seeks, some 
secret motive in our actions. What answer did 
Novosiltsev get? None. The English have not 
understood and cannot understand the self- 
abnegation of our Emperor who wants noth- 
ing for himself, but only desires the good of 
mankind. And what have they promised? Noth- 
ing! And what little they have promised they 
will not perform! Prussia has always declared 
that Buonaparte is invincible and that all 
Europe is powerless before him. . . . And I 
don't believe a word that Hardenburg says, 
or Haugwitz either. This famous Prussian neu- 
trality is just a trap. I have faith only in God 
and the lofty destiny of our adored monarch. 
He will save Europe!" 

She suddenly paused, smiling at her own 
impetuosity. 

"I think," said the prince with a smile, "that 
if you had been sent instead of our dear 
Wintzingerode you would have captured the 
King of Prussia's consent by assault. You are 
so eloquent. Will you give me a cup of tea?" 

"In a moment. X propos"she added, becom- 
ing calm again, "I am expecting two very in- 
teresting men tonight, le Vicomte de Morte- 
mart, who is connected with the Montmoren- 
cys through the Rohans,oneof the best French 
families. He is one of the genuine dmigrh, the 
good ones. And also the Abbe* Morio. Do you 
know that profound thinker? He has been re- 
ceived by the Emperor. Had you heard?" 

"I shall be delighted to meet them," said the 
prince. "But tell me," he added with studied 
carelessness as if it had only just occurred to 
him, though the question he was about to ask 
was the chief motive of his visit, "is it true that 
the Dowager Empress wants Baron Funke to be 
appointed first secretary at Vienna? The baron 



by all accounts is a poor creature." 

Prince Vasfli wished to obtain this post for 
his son, but others were trying through the 
Dowager Empress Mdrya Fedorovna to secure 
it for the baron. 

Anna Pdvlovna almost closed her eyes to in- 
dicate that neither she nor anyone else had a 
right to criticize what the Empress desired or 
was pleased with. 

"Baron Funke has been recommended to the 
Dowager Empress by her sister," was all she 
said, in a dry and mournful tone. 

As she named the Empress, Anna Pdvlovna's 
face suddenly assumed an expression of pro- 
found and sincere devotion and respect min- 
gled with sadness, and thisoccurred every time 
she mentioned her illustrious patroness. She 
added that Her Majesty had deigned to show 
Baron Funke beaucoup d'estime, and again 
her face clouded over with sadness. 

The prince was silent and looked indiffer- 
ent. But, with the womanly and courtierlike 
quickness and tact habitual to her, Anna Pdv- 
lovna wished both to rebuke him (for daring 
to speak as he had done of a man recommended 
to the Empress) and at the same time to con- 
sole him, so she said: 

"Now about your family. Do you know that 
since your daughter came out everyone has 
been enraptured by her? They say she is amaz- 
ingly beautiful." 

The prince bowed to signify his respect and 
gratitude. 

"I often think," she continued after a short 
pause, drawing nearer to the prince and smil- 
ing amiably at him as if to show that political 
and social topics were ended and the time had 
come for intimate conversation "I often think 
how unfairly sometimes the joys of life are dis- 
tributed. Why has fate given you two such 
splendid children? I don't speak of Anatole, 
your youngest. I don't like him," she added in 
a tone admitting of no rejoinder and raising 
her eyebrows. "Two such charming children. 
And really you appreciate them less than any- 
one, and so you don't deserve to have them." 

And she smiled her ecstatic smile. 

"I can't help it," said the prince. "Lavater 
would have said I lack the bump of paternity." 

"Don't joke; I mean to have a serious talk 
with you. Do you know I am dissatisfied with 
your younger son? Between ourselves" (and 
her face assumed its melancholy expression), 
"he was mentioned at Her Majesty's and you 
were pitied. . . ." 

The prince answered nothing, but she

looked at him significantly, awaiting a reply. 
He frowned. 

"What would you have me do?" he said at 
last. "You know I did all a father could for 
their education, and they have both turned 
out fools. Hippolyte is at least a quiet fool, but 
Anatole is an active one. That is the only dif- 
ference between them." He said this smiling 
in a way more natural and animated than 
usual, so that the wrinkles round his mouth 
very clearly revealed something unexpectedly 
coarse and unpleasant. 

"And why are children born to such men as 
you? If you were not a father there would be 
nothing I could reproach you with," said Anna 
Pdvlovna, looking up pensively. 

"I am your faithful slave and to you alone I 
can confess that my children are the bane of 
my life. It is the cross I have to bear. That is 
how I explain it to myself. It can't be helped!" 

He said no more, but expressed his resigna- 
tion to cruel fate by a gesture. Anna Pdvlovna 
meditated. 

"Have you never thought of marrying your 
prodigal son Anatole?" she asked. "They say 
old maids have a mania for matchmaking, and 
though I don't feel that weakness in myself as 
yet, I know a little person who is very unhappy 
with her father. She is a relation of yours, 
Princess Mary Bolk6nskaya." 

Prince Vasili did not reply, though, with the 
quickness of memory and perception befitting 
a man of the world, he indicated by a move- 
ment of the head that he was considering this 
information. 

"Do you know," he said at last, evidently 
unable to check the sad current of his thoughts, 
"that Anatole is costing me forty thousand 
rubles a year? And," he went on after a pause, 
"what will it be in five years, if he goes on like 
this?" Presently he added: "That's what we 

fathers have to put up with Is this princess 

of yours rich?" 

"Her father is very rich and stingy. He lives 
in the country. He is the well-known Prince 
Bolk6nski who had to retire from the army un- 
der the late Emperor, and was nicknamed 'the 
King of Prussia.' He is very clever but eccen- 
tric, and a bore. The poor girl is very unhappy. 
She has a brother; I think you know him, he 
married Lise Meinen lately. He is an aide-de- 
camp of Kutiizov's and will be here tonight." 

"Listen, dear Annette," said the prince, sud- 
denly taking Anna Pdvlovna's hand and for 
some reason drawing it downwards. "Arrange 
that affair for me and I shall always be your 



most devoted slave slaje with an /, as a village 
elder of mine writes in his reports. She is rich 
and of good family and that's all I want." 

And with the familiarity and easy grace 
peculiar to him, he raised the maid of honor's 
hand to his lips, kissed it, and swung it to and 
fro as he lay back in his armchair, looking in 
another direction. 

"Attendee" said Anna Pdvlovna, reflecting, 
"I'll speak to Lise, young Bolk6nski's wife, this 
very evening, and perhaps the thing can be 
arranged. It shall be on your family's behalf 
that I'll start my apprenticeship as old maid." 

CHAPTER II 

ANNA PAVLOVNA'S drawing room was gradually 
filling. The highest Petersburg society was as- 
sembled there: people differing widely in age 
and character but alike in the social circle to 
which they belonged. Prince Vasili's daughter, 
the beautiful Hlne, came to take her father 
to the ambassador's entertainment; she wore a 
ball dress and her badge as maid of honor. The 
youthful little Princess Bolkonskaya, known 
as la femme la plus sSduisante de Pfaersbourg? 
was also there. She had been married during 
the previous winter, and being pregnant did 
not go to any large gatherings, but only to small 
receptions. Prince Vasfli's son, Hippolyte, had 
come with Mortemart, whom he introduced. 
The Abb6 Morio and many others had also 
come. 

To each new arrival Anna Pdvlovna safcl, 
"You have not yet seen my aunt," or "You do 
not know my aunt?" and very gravely con- 
ducted him or her to a little old lady, wearing 
large bows of ribbon in her cap, who had come 
sailing in from another room as soon as the 
guests began to arrive; and slowly turning her 
eyes from the visitor to her aunt, Anna Pdv- 
lovna mentioned each one's name and then 
left them. 

Each visitor performed the ceremony of 
greeting this old aunt whom not one of them 
knew, not one of them wanted to know, and 
not one of them cared about; Anna Pdvlovna 
observed these greetings with mournful and sol- 
emn interest and silent approval. The aunt 
spoke to each of them in the same words, about 
their health and her own, and the health of 
Her Majesty, "who, thank God, was better to- 
day." And each visitor, though politeness pre- 
vented his showing impatience, left the old 
woman with a sense of relief at having per- 
formed a vexatious duty and did not return to 

1 The most fascinating woman in Petersburg. 



WAR AND PEACE 



her the whole evening. 

The young Princess Bolk6nskaya had 
brought some work in a gold-embroidered vel- 
vet bag. Her pretty little upper lip, on which 
a delicate dark down was just perceptible, was 
too short for her teeth, but it lifted all the more 
sweetly, and was especially charming when she 
occasionally drew it down to meet the lower 
lip. As is always the case with a thoroughly at- 
tractive woman, her defectthe shortness of 
her upperlip and her half-open mouth seemed 
to be her own special and peculiar form of 
beauty. Everyone brightened at the sight of 
this pretty young woman, so soon to become 
a mother, so full of life and health, and carry- 
ing her burden so lightly. Old men and dull 
dispirited young ones who looked at her, after 
being in her company and talking to her a 
litttle while, felt as if they too were becoming, 
like her, full of life and health. All who talked 
to her, and at each word saw her bright smile 
and the constant gleam of her white teeth, 
thought that they were in a specially amiable 
mood that day. 

The little princess went round the table 
with quick, short, swaying steps, her workbag 
on her arm, and gaily spreading out her dress 
sat down on a sofa near the silver samovar, as 
if all she was doing was a pleasure to herself 
and to all around her. "I have brought my 
work," said she in French, displaying her bag 
and addressing all present. "Mind, Annette, 
I hope you have not played a wicked trick on 
me," she added, turning to her hostess. "You 
wrote that it was to be quite a small reception, 
and just see how badly I am dressed." And she 
spread out her arms to show her short-waisted, 
lace-trimmed, dainty gray dress, girdled with 
a broad ribbon just below the breast. 

"Soyez tranquille, Lise, you will always be 
prettier than anyone else," replied Anna Pdv- 
lovna. 

"You know/' said the princess in the same 
tone of voice and still in French, turning to a 
general, "my husband is deserting me? He is 
going to get himself killed. Tell me what this 
wretched war is for?" she added, addressing 
Prince Vasfli, and without waiting for an an- 
swer she turned to speak to his daughter, the 
beautiful Hlne. 

"What a delightful woman this little prin- 
cess isl" said Prince Vasili to Anna Pdvlovna. 

One of the next arrivals was a stout, heavily 
built young man with close-cropped hair, spec- 
tacles, the light-colored breeches fashionable 
at that time, a very high ruffle, and a brown 



dress coat. This stout young man was an illegit- 
imate son^of Count Bezukhov, a well-known 
grandee of Catherine's time who now lay dy- 
ing in Moscow. The young man had not yet 
entered either the military or civil service, as 
he had only just returned from abroad where 
he had been educated, and this was his first ap- 
pearance in society. Anna Pdvlovna greeted 
him with the nod she accorded to the lowest 
hierarchy in her drawing room. But in spite of 
this lowest-grade greeting, a look of anxiety 
and fear, as at the sight of something too large 
and unsuited to the place, came over her face 
when she saw Pierre enter. Though he was cer- 
tainly rather bigger than the other men in the 
room, her anxiety could only have reference 
to the clever though shy, but observant and 
natural, expression which distinguished him 
from everyone else in that drawing room. 

"It is very good of you, Monsieur Pierre, to 
come and visit a poor invalid," said Anna Pdv- 
lovna, exchanging an alarmed glance with her 
aunt as she conducted him to her. 

Pierre murmured something unintelligible, 
and continued to look round as if in search of 
something. On his way to the aunt he bowed 
to the little princess with a pleased smile, as to 
an intimate acquaintance. 

Anna Pdvlovna's alarm was justified, for 
Pierre turned away from the aunt without wait- 
ing to hear her speech about Her Majesty's 
health. Anna Pdvlovna in dismay detained 
him with the words: "Do you know the Abbe* 
Morio? He is a most interesting man." 

"Yes, I have heard of his scheme for perpet- 
ual peace, and it is very interesting but hardly 
feasible." 

"You think so?" rejoined Anna Pdvlovna in 
order to say something and get away to attend 
to her duties as hostess. But Pierre now com- 
mitted a reverse act of impoliteness. First he 
had left a lady before she had finished speak- 
ing to him, and now he continued to speak to 
another who wished to getaway. With his head 
bent, and his big feet spread apart, he began 
explaining his reasons for thinking the abbess 
plan chimerical. 

"We will talk of it later," said Anna Pdv- 
lovna with a smile. 

And having got rid of this young man who 
did not know how to behave, she resumed her 
duties as hostess and continued to listen and 
watch, ready to help at any point where the 
conversation might happen to flag. As the fore- 
man of a spinning mill, when he has set the 
hands to work, goes round and notices here a 



BOOK ONE 



spindle that has stopped or there one that 
creaks or makes more noise than it should, and 
hastens to check the machine or set it in proper 
motion, so Anna Pavlovna moved about her 
drawing room, approaching now a silent, now 
a too-noisy group, and by a word or slight re- 
arrangement kept the conversational machine 
in steady, proper, and regular motion. But 
amid these cares her anxiety about Pierre was 
evident. She kept an anxious watch on him 
when he approached the group round Morte- 
mart to listen to what was being said there, and 
again when he passed to another group whose 
center was the abbe*. 

Pierre had been educated abroad, and this 
reception at Anna Pavlovna's was the first he 
had attended in Russia. He knew that all the 
intellectual lights of Petersburg were gathered 
there and, like a child in a toyshop, did not 
know which way to look, afraid of missing any 
clever conversation that was to be heard. See- 
ing the self-confident and refined expression 
on the faces of those present he was always ex- 
pecting to hear something very profound. At 
last he came up to Morio. Here the conversa- 
tion seemed interesting and he stood waiting 
for an opportunity to express his own views, 
as young people are fond of doing. 

CHAPTER III 

ANNA PAVLOVNA'S reception was in full swing. 
The spindles hummed steadily and ceaselessly 
on all sides. With the exception of the aunt, 
beside whom sat only one elderly lady, who 
with her thin careworn face was rather out of 
place in this brilliant society, the whole com- 
pany had settled into three groups. One, chiefly 
masculine, had formed round the abbe". An- 
other, of young people, was grouped round 
the beautiful Princess Hlne, Prince Vasfli's 
daughter, and the little Princess Bolk6nskaya, 
very pretty and rosy, though rather too plump 
for her age. The third group was gathered 
round Mortemart and Anna Pavlovna. 

The vicomte was a nice-looking young man 
with soft features and polished manners, who 
evidently considered himself a celebrity but 
out of politeness modestly placed himself at 
the disposal of the circle in which he found 
himself. Anna Pdvlovna was obviously serving 
him up as a treat to her guests. As a clever 
maitre d'hotel serves up as a specially choice 
delicacy a piece of meat that no one who had 
seen it in the kitchen would have cared to eat, 
so Anna Pavlovna served up to her guests, first 
the vicomte and then the abbe*, as peculiarly 



choice morsels. The group about Mortemart 
immediately began discussing the murder of the 
Due d'Enghien. The vicomte said that the Due 
d'Enghien had perished by his own magna- 
nimity, and that there were particular reasons 
for Buonaparte's hatred of him. 

"Ah, yes! Do tell us all about it, Vicomte," 
said Anna Pdvlovna, with a pleasant feeling 
that there was something a la Louis XV in the 
sound of that sentence: "Contez nous gela, 
Vicomte." 

The vicomte bowed and smiled courteously 
in token of his willingness to comply. Anna 
Pavlovna arranged a group round him, invit- 
ing everyone to listen to his tale. 

"The vicomte knew the due personally," 
whispered Anna Pdvlovna to one of the guests. 
"The vicomte is a wonderful raconteur," said 
she to another. "How evidently he belongs to 
the best society," said she to a third; and the 
vicomte was served up to the company in the 
choicest and most advantageous style, like a 
well-garnished joint of roast beef on a hot 
dish. 

The vicomte wished to begin his story and 
gave a subtle smile. 

"Come over here, Hlne, dear," said Anna 
Pvlovna to the beautiful young princess who 
was sitting some way off, the center of another 
group. 

The princess smiled. She rose with the same 
unchanging smile with which she had first en- 
tered the room the smile of a perfectly beauti- 
ful woman. With a slight rustle of her white 
dress trimmed with moss and ivy, with a gleam 
of white shoulders, glossy hair, and sparkling 
diamonds, she passed between the men who 
made way for her, not looking at any of them 
but smiling on all, as if graciously allowing 
each the privilege of admiring her beautiful 
figure and shapely shoulders, back, and bosom 
which in the fashion of those days were very 
much exposed and she seemed to bring the 
glamour of a ballroom with her as she moved 
toward Anna Pavlovna. Hlene was so lovely 
that not only did she not show any trace of 
coquetry, but on the contrary she even appeared 
shy of her unquestionable and all too victori- 
ous beauty. She seemed to wish, but to be un- 
able, to diminish its effect. 

"How lovely!" said everyone who saw her; 
and the vicomte lifted his shoulders and 
dropped his eyes as if startled by something ex- 
traordinary when she took her seat opposite and 
beamed upon him also with her unchanging 
smile. 



6 



WAR AND PEACE 



"Madame, I doubt my ability before such 
an audience," said he, smilingly inclining his 
head. 

The princess rested her bare round arm on 
a little table and considered a reply unneces- 
sary. She smilingly waited. All the time the 
story was being told she sat upright, glancing 
now at her beautiful round arm, altered in 
shape by its pressure on the table, now at her 
still more beautiful bosom, on which she read- 
justed a diamond necklace. From time to time 
she smoothed the folds of her dress, and when- 
ever the story produced an effect she glanced 
at Anna Pavlovna, at once adopted just the 
expression she saw on the maid of honor's face, 
and again relapsed into her radiant smile. 

The little princess had also left the tea table 
and followed Helne. 

"Wait a moment, I'll get my work. . . . Now 
then, what are you thinking of?" she went on, 
turning to Prince Hippolyte. "Fetch me my 
workbag." 

There was a general movement as the prin- 
cess, smiling and talking merrily to everyone 
at once, sat down and gaily arranged herself in 
her seat. 

"Now I am all right," she said, and asking 
the vicomte to begin, she took up her work. 

Prince Hippolyte, having brought the work- 
bag, joined the circle and moving a chair close 
to hers seated himself beside her. 

Le charmant Hippolyte was surprising by 
his extraordinary resemblance to his beautiful 
sister, but yet more by the fact that in spite of 
this resemblance he was exceedingly ugly. His 
features were like his sister's, but while in her 
case everything was lit up by a joyous, self- 
satisfied, youthful, and constant smile of ani- 
mation, and by the wonderful classic beauty 
of her figure, his face on the contrary was 
dulled by imbecility and a constant expression 
of sullen self-confidence, while his body was 
thin and weak. His eyes, nose, and mouth all 
seemed puckered into a vacant, wearied gri- 
mace, and his arms and legs always fell into 
unnatural positions. 

"It's not going to be a ghost story?" said he, 
sitting down beside the princess and hastily 
adjusting his lorgnette, as if without this in- 
strument he could not begin to speak. 

"Why no, my dear fellow," said the aston- 
ished narrator, shrugging his shoulders. 

"Because I hate ghost stones," said Prince 
Hippolyte in a tone which showed that he only 
understood die meaning of his words after he 
had uttered them. 



He spoke with such self-confidence that his 
hearers ould not be sure whether what he said 
was very witty or very stupid. He was dressed 
in a dark-green dress coat, knee breeches of 
the color of cuisse de nymphe effrayJe, as he 
called it, shoes, and silk stockings. 

The vicomte told his tale very neatly. It was 
an anecdote, then current, to the effect that 
the Due d'Enghien had gone secretly to Paris 
to visit Mademoiselle George; thatat her house 
he came upon Bonaparte, who also enjoyed 
the famous actress' favors, and that in his pres- 
ence Napoleon happened to fall into one of 
the fainting fits to which he was subject, and 
was thus at the due's mercy. The latter spared 
him, and this magnanimity Bonaparte subse- 
quently repaid by death. 

The story was very pretty and interesting, 
especially at the point where the rivals sud- 
denly recognized one another; and the ladies 
looked agitated. 

"Charming!" said Anna PAvlovna with an in- 
quiring glance at the little princess. 

"Charming!" whispered the little princess, 
sticking the needle into her work as if to testify 
that the interest and fascination of the story 
prevented her from going on with it. 

The vicomte appreciated this silent praise 
and smiling gratefully prepared to continue, 
but just then Anna Pavlovna, who had kept a 
watchful eye on the young man who so alarmed 
her, noticed that he was talking too loudly 
and vehemently with the abbe", so she hurried 
to the rescue. Pierre had managed to start a 
conversation with the abb about the balance 
of power, and the latter, evidently interested 
by the young man's simple-minded eagerness, 
was explaining his pet theory. Both were talk- 
ing and listening too eagerly and too naturally, 
which was why Anna Pavlovna disapproved. 

"The means are . . . the balance of power in 
Europe and the rights of the people," the abbe* 
was saying. "It is only necessary for one power- 
ful nation like Russia barbaric as she is said 
to be to place herself disinterestedly at the 
head of an alliance having for its object the 
mai n tenance of the balance of power of Europe, 
and it would save the world!" 

"But how are you to get that balance?" Pierre 
was beginning. 

At that moment Anna Pdvlovna came up and, 
looking severely at Pierre, asked the Italian 
how he stood the Russian climate. The Italian's 
face instantly changed and assumed an offen- 
sively affected, sugary expression, evidently 
habitual to him when conversing with women. 



BOOK 

"I am so enchanted by the brilliancy of the 
wit and culture of the society, more especially 
of the feminine society, in which I have had 
the honor of being received, that I have not 
yet had time to think of the climate," said he. 

Not letting the abbe" and Pierre escape, Anna 
Pdvlovna, the more conveniently to keep them 
under observation, brought them into the 
larger circle. 

CHAPTER IV 

JUST THEN another visitor entered the drawing 
room: Prince Andrew Bolk6nski, the little 
princess' husband. He was a very handsome 
young man, of medium height, with firm, clear- 
cut features. Everything about him, from his 
weary, bored expression to his quiet, measured 
step, offered a most striking contrast to his 
lively little wife. It was evident that he not 
only knew everyone in the drawing room, but 
had found them to be so tiresome that it 
wearied him to look at or listen to them. And 
among all these faces that he found so tedious, 
none seemed to bore him so much as that of 
his pretty wife. He turned away from her with 
a grimace that distorted his handsome face, 
kissed Anna Pdvlovna's hand, and screwing 
up his eyes scanned the whole company. 

"You are off to the war, Prince?" said Anna 
Pdvlovna. 

"General Kutuzov," said Bolk6nski, speak- 
ing French and stressing the last syllable of the 
general's name like a Frenchman, "has been 
pleased to take me as an aide-de-camp. . . ." 

"And Lise, your wile?" 

"She will go to the country." 

"Are you not ashamed to deprive us of your 
charming wife?" 

"Andre," said his wife, addressing her hus- 
band in the same coquettish manner in which 
she spoke to other men, "the vicomte has been 
telling us such a tale about Mademoiselle 
George and Buonaparte!" 

Prince Andrew screwed up his eyes and 
turned away. Pierre, who from the moment 
Prince Andrew entered the room had watched 
him with glad, affectionate eyes, now came up 
and took his arm. Before he looked round 
Prince Andrew frowned again, expressing his 
annoyance with whoever was touching his arm, 
but when he saw Pierre's beaming face he gave 
him an unexpectedly kind and pleasant smile. 

"There now! ... So you, too, are in the great 
world?" said he to Pierre. 

"I knew you would be here," replied Pierre. 
"I will come to supper with you. May I?" he 



ONE 7 

added in a low voice so as not to disturb the 
vicomte who was continuing his story. 

"No, impossible 1" said Prince Andrew, 
laughing and pressing Pierre's hand to show 
that there was no need to ask the question. He 
wished to say something more, but at that mo- 
ment Prince Vastti and his daughter got up to 
go and the two young men rose to let them 
pass. 

"You must excuse me, dear Vicomte," said 
Prince Vasili to the Frenchman, holding him 
down by the sleeve in a friendly way to prevent 
his rising. "This unfortunate fete at the ambas- 
sador's deprives me of a pleasure, and obliges 
me to interrupt you. I am very sorry to leave 
your enchanting party," said he, turning to 
Anna Pdvlovna. 

His daughter, Princess He*lene, passed be- 
tween the chairs, lightly holding up the folds 
of her dress, and the smile shone still more 
radiantly on her beautiful face. Pierre gazed 
at her with rapturous, almost frightened, eyes 
as she passed him. 

"Very lovely," said Prince Andrew. 

"Very," said Pierre. 

In passing, Prince Vasili seized Pierre's hand 
and said to Anna Pdvlovna: "Educate this bear 
for me! He has been staying with me a whole 
month and this is the first time I have seen 
him in society. Nothing is so necessary for a 
young man as the society of clever women." 

ANNA PAVLOVNA smiled and promised to take 
Pierre in hand. She knew his father to be 
a connection of Prince Vasili's. The elderly 
lady who had been sitting with the old aunt 
rose hurriedly and overtook Prince Vasfli in 
the anteroom. All the affectation of interest 
she had assumed had left her kindly and tear- 
worn face and it now expressed only anxiety 
and fear. 

"How about my son Borfs, Prince?" said 
she, hurrying after him into the anteroom. "1 
can't remain any longer in Petersburg. Tell 
me what news I may take back to my poor 
boy." 

Although Prince Vasili listened reluctantly 
and not very politely to the elderly lady, even 
betraying some impatience, she gave him an 
ingratiating and appealing smile, and took his 
hand that he might not go away. 

"What would it cost you to say a word to the 
Emperor, and then he would be transferred to 
the Guards at once?" said she. 

"Believe me, Princess, I am ready to do all 
I can," answered Prince Vasili, "but it is dif- 



8 



WAR AND PEACE 



ficult for me to ask the Emperor. I should ad- 
vise you to appeal to Rumydntsev through 
Prince Golftsyn. That would be the best way." 

The elderly lady was a Princess Drubet- 
skdya, belonging to one of the best families in 
Russia, but she was poor, and having long been 
out of society had lost her former influential 
connections. She had now come to Petersburg 
to procure an appointment in the Guards for 
her only son. It was, in fact, solely to meet 
Prince Vasfli that she had obtained an invita- 
tion to Anna Pdvlovna's reception and had sat 
listening to the vicomte's story. Prince Vasfli's 
words frightened her, an embittered look 
clouded her once handsome face, but only for 
a moment; then she smiled again and clutched 
Prince Vasili's arm more tightly. 

"Listen to me, Prince," said she. "I have 
never yet asked you for anything and I never 
will again, nor have I ever reminded you of 
my father's friendship for you; but now I en- 
treat you for God's sake to do this for my son 
and I shall always regard you as a benefac- 
tor," she added hurriedly. "No, don't be angry, 
but promise! I have asked Golitsyn and he has 
refused. Be the kindhearted man you always 
were," she said, trying to smile though tears 
were in her eyes. 

"Papa, we shall be late," said Princess 
Hel&ne, turning her beautiful head and look- 
ing over her classically molded shoulder as 
she stood waiting by the door. 

Influence in society, however, is capital which 
has to be economized if it is to last. Prince 
Vasfli knew this, and having once realized 
that if he asked on behalf of all who begged 
of him, he would soon be unable to ask for 
himself, he became chary of using his influ- 
ence. But in Princess Drubetskdya's case he 
felt, after her second appeal, something like 
qualms of conscience. She had reminded him 
of what was quite true; he had been indebted to 
her father for the first steps in his career. More- 
over, he could see by her manners that she was 
one of those womenmostly mothers who, 
having once made up their minds, will not rest 
until they have gained their end, and are pre- 
pared if necessary to go on insisting day after 
day and hour after hour, and even to make 
scenes. This last consideration moved him. 

"My dear Anna Mikhdylovna," said he with 
his usual familiarity and weariness of tone, "it 
is almost impossible for me to do what you ask; 
but to prove my devotion to you and how I re- 
spect your father's memory, I will do the im- 
possibleyour son shall be transferred to the 



Guards. Here is my hand on it. Are you satis- 
fied?" * 

"My dear benefactor! This is what I ex- 
pected from you I knew your kindness!" He 
turned to go. 

"Wait just a word! When he has been trans- 
ferred to the Guards . . ." she faltered. "You 
are on good terms with Michael Ilari6novich 
Kuttizov . . . recommend Boris to him as adju- 
tant! Then I shall be at rest, and then . . ." 

Prince Vasili smiled. 

"No, I won't promise that. You don't know 
how Kutiizov is pestered since his appoint- 
ment as Commander in Chief. He told me 
himself that all the Moscow ladies have con- 
spired to give him all their sons as adjutants." 

"No, but do promise! I won't let you go! My 
dear benefactor . . ." 

"Papa," said his beautiful daughter in the 
same tone as before, "we shall be late." 

"Well, au revoir! Good-by! You hear her?" 

"Then tomorrow you will speak to the Em- 
peror?" 

"Certainly; but about Kutiizov, I don't 
promise." 

"Do promise, do promise, Vasfli!" cried 
Anna Mikhdylovna as he went, with the smile 
of a coquettish girl, which at one time prob- 
ably came naturally to her, but was now very 
ill-suited to her careworn face. 

Apparently she had forgotten her age and 
by force of habit employed all the old fem- 
inine arts. But as soon as the prince had gone 
her face resumed its former cold, artificial ex- 
pression. She returned to the group where the 
vicomte was still talking, and again pretended 
to listen, while waiting till it would be time 
to leave. Her task was accomplished. 

CHAPTER V 

"AND what do you think of this latest com- 
edy, the coronation at Milan?" asked Anna 
Pavlovna, "and of the comedy of the people 
of Genoa and Lucca laying their petitions 
before Monsieur Buonaparte, and Monsieur 
Buonaparte sitting on a throne and granting 
the petitions of the nations? Adorable! It is 
enough to make one's head whirl! It is as if 
the whole world had gone crazy." 

Prince Andrew looked Anna Pdvlovna 
straight in the face with a sarcastic smile. 

" 'Dieu me la donne, gare a qui la touched J 
They say he was very fine when he said that," 
he remarked, repeating the words in Italian: 

1 God has given it to me, let him who touches it 
beware) 



BOOK 

" 'Dio mi rha dato. Guai a chi la tocchi!' " 

"I hope this will prove the last cft*op that 
will make the glass run over," Anna Pavlovna 
continued. "The sovereigns will not be able to 
endure this man who is a menace to every- 
thing." 

"The sovereigns? I do not speak of Russia," 
said the vicomte, polite but hopeless: "The 
sovereigns, madame . . . What have they done 
for Louis XVII, for the Queen, or for Madame 
Elizabeth? Nothing!" and he became more an- 
imated. "And believe me, they are reaping the 
reward of their betrayal of the Bourbon cause. 
The sovereigns! Why, they are sending am- 
bassadors to compliment the usurper." 

And sighing disdainfully, he again changed 
his position. 

Prince Hippolyte, who had been gazing at 
the vicomte for some time through his lor- 
gnette, suddenly turned completely round to- 
ward the little princess, and having asked for 
a needle began tracing the Conde* coat of arms 
on the table. He explained this to her with as 
much gravity as if she had asked him to do it. 

"Baton de gueules, engrele de gueules d' 
azurmaison Condd," said he. 

The princess listened, smiling. 

"If Buonaparte remains on the throne of 
France a year longer," the vicomte continued, 
with the air of a man who, in a matter with 
which he is better acquainted than anyone else, 
does not listen to others but follows the cur- 
rent of his own thoughts, "things will have 
gone too far. By intrigues, violence, exile, and 
executions,French society I mean good French 
society will have been forever destroyed, and 
then . . ." 

He shrugged his shoulders and spread out 
his hands. JPierre wished to make a remark, for 
the conversation interested him, but Anna 
Pdvlovna, who had him under observation, in- 
terrupted: 

"The Emperor Alexander," said she, with 
the melancholy which always accompanied any 
reference of hers to the Imperial family, "has 
declared that he will leave it to the French 
people themselves to choose their own form 
of government; and I believe that once free 
from the usurper, the whole nation will cer- 
tainly throw itself into the arms of its rightful 
king," she concluded, trying to be amiable to 
the royalist emigrant. 

. "That is doubtful," said Prince Andrew. 
"Monsieur le Vicomte quite rightly supposes 
that matters have already gone too far. I think 
it will be difficult to return to the old regime."
